{% include tutorial/toc.md %}

## The Basics

First we will make the most basic image: 1-bit pixels and no palette.

*__WARNING:__ Be carful with your usage of `>` and `>>`. `>` will overwrite any existing bytes.*

### Signature

The first thing we need is the file signature. Let's create a file
with the correct file signature.

```console
$ printf "IMRETRO" > test.imretro
```

### Mode Byte

Next we write the mode byte. We want to use 1 bit per pixel (two colors),
and we *do not* want to include a palette in our file. If you refer to
the [format docs on the main repo][mode byte docs], you will see that we do not
need to set any bits. `00` for pixel mode, `0` for no palette, and opting out
of all other features. So we will print an [octal] zero value for the mode
byte.

```console
$ printf "\000" >> test.imretro
```

### Dimensions

The dimensions are width and height, stored as 2 12-bit numbers respectively,
which totals 3 bytes.

We will make a 9x9 image. So, in [hexadecimal], our dimensions would be
`009009`. If we split this into 3 parts, we get the hex bytes `00`, `90`, and
`09`. As binary, the bytes are `00000000`, `01011010`, and `00001001`. So,
let's `printf` these dimensions as [octal].

```console
$ printf "\000\132\011" >> test.imretro
```

### Pixels

We're not declaring a palette, so we can skip straight to the pixels. Let's
make an alternating black and white checkerboard. Technically, the checkerboard
is "off" and "on" instead of black and white, since someone decoding the file
could choose their own palette (but the default palette is black and white).

We will alternate white, black, white, black, etc. for all 81 of our pixels.
we have 81 pixels because our dimensions are 9x9.

Since this pattern is repetetive, we know that the first 10 bytes (80 pixels)
will be `10101010`. The last byte will be `10000000`. The decoder should ignore
the last 7 bits, as they are unused, but we will leave them as `0` because we
have no reason to set them.

`10101010` in [octal] is `252`, and `10000000` is `200`. So let's `printf`
these values.

```console
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\252" >> test.imretro
$ printf "\200" >> test.imretro
```

That's it!

If you followed the instructions correctly, you should have a file
[like this one][result].

(A converter will eventually be implemented so that a PNG version
can be displayed here)

If you run `xxd` on the file, you should get a hex dump like this.

```
00000000: 494d 5245 5452 4f00 005a 09aa aaaa aaaa  IMRETRO..Z......
00000010: aaaa aaaa aa80                           ......
```

Speaking of `xxd`, [here is a supplementary tutorial][hexdump edit supplement]
for using a hexdump to edit existing data.

[hexadecimal]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hexadecimal
[hexdump edit supplement]: ./supplements/hexedit
[mode byte docs]: https://github.com/imretro/imretro#mode-byte
[octal]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octal
[result]: ../assets/tutorial/1-result.imretro
