{% include tutorial/toc.md %}

## 2-Bit Pixels (And Palettes)

Pixels, now with 100% more bits! The 2-bit pixel mode supports 4 distinct
colors. This is inspired by the color support of
[the original Game Boy][Game Boy specs].

### Differences From 1-bit Pixel Mode

#### The Mode Byte

In the [previous tutorial], we made an imretro image with 1-bit mode. Looking
at the [imretro docs][mode byte docs], we can see that 2-bit pixel mode is
activated by setting the first 2 bits (from the left) to `01`.

#### Pixels

This is pretty obvious, but in 2-bit pixel mode, each pixel takes 2 bits, for 4
pixels per byte.

### Making The Image

Let's make an image! Like before, we'll start with the signature.

```console
$ printf "IMRETRO" > mystery-character.imretro
```

Now, for the mode byte, we know we should set pixel mode to `01`. But let's do
something extra. Each imretro file can optionally contain its own palette, to
be used if the defaults aren't sufficient. We signify that the image comes with
its own palette by setting the 3rd bit from the left. Without setting any other
bits, the palette would be grayscale. Let's do an RGBA palette instead. Per the
[docs][mode byte docs], we can change the number of color channels with the 6th
and 7th bit. `10` is 4 channels, RGBA. Our byte will be `01100100`. In
octal, that's `144`.

```console
$ printf "\144" >> mystery-character.imretro
```

Next are the dimensions. Let's make this image 12x16. In hex, that's `00C` and
`010`. Split into 3 bytes and in octal, that's `000`, `300`, and `020`.

```console
$ printf "\000\300\020" >> mystery-character.imretro
```

#### The Palette

In the [previous tutorial] this is where we would start writing the pixels. But
we opted into an in-file palette, so we'll start writing a palette instead.
Each color channel is 2 bits, unless you set the color accuracy flag (more on
this in a later tutorial). With 4 color channels, each color is a byte. and
with 2-bit pixels we need to define 4 colors, so that's 4 bytes. Here is the
breakdown of an RGBA byte.
```
11111111
| | | |_alpha
| | |_blue
| |_green
|_red
```

Let's set our 4 colors. Can you guess what the colors are?

```console
$ printf "\000\303\017\347" >> mystery-character.imretro
```

#### Writing The Pixels

In the previous tutorial, the pixels were either `0` or `1`. With 2 bits, they
can now be `00`, `01`, `10`, or `11`. Another way to think of these is as the
indices of the palette: `00` (decimal `0`) for first color, `01` (decimal `1`)
for second color, etc.

Let's write our pixels.

Our previous code blocks were all console sessions, but this time we'll make a
[runnable script][pixel-script] to avoid repetitive typing.

```bash
{% include tutorial/2-pixels.sh %}
```

```console
$ ./pixels.sh >> mystery-character.imretro
```

[Game Boy specs]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_Boy#Technical_specifications
[mode byte docs]: https://github.com/imretro/imretro#mode-byte
[pixel-script]: /assets/tutorial/2-pixels.sh
[previous tutorial]: ./1
